Studios getting started guide (#479)
seqeralabs/docs: platform_versioned_docs/version-24.3/getting-started/studios.mdx

---
title: "Studios for interactive analysis"
description: "An tutorial for creating interactive analysis Studios for Jupyter, RStudio, VSCode, and more"
date: "17 Feb 2025"
tags: [platform, studios, data studios, jupyter, rstudio, xpra, vscode, conda]
toc_max_heading_level: 3
---

> [Studios](../data_studios/index.mdx) allows users to host a variety of container images directly in Seqera Platform compute environments for analysis using popular environments including Jupyter (Python) and RStudio notebooks (R), Visual Studio Code IDEs, and Xpra remote desktops. Each studio session provides a dedicated interactive environment that encapsulates the live environment.

Reviewer: Add hyperlinks? I didn't know what Xpra was when I first heard it being talked about.

:::note
This script and instructions can also be used to visualize the structures from nf-core/proteinfold runs performed with your own public or private data. 
:::

#### Create an AWS Batch compute environment 

Studios requires an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment available, create one with the following attributes:

- **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the nf-core AWS megatests public data optimally, select **eu-west-1**.
- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 2 available CPUs and 8192 MB of RAM. 

#### Add data using Data Explorer

> For the purposes of this guide, add the proteinfold results (H1065 sequence) from the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket to your workspace using Data Explorer:

Reviewer: Link to the prefix or is assumption everyone knows what this is?
Nevermind, I see it's 2 lines down.

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**. 
1. Specify the bucket details:
    - **Provider**: AWS
    - **Bucket path**: `s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/proteinfold/results-9bea0dc4ebb26358142afbcab3d7efd962d3a820`
    - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `nf-core-awsmegatests-proteinfold-h1065`.
    - **Credentials**: Select **Public** from the dropdown menu.
    - An optional bucket **Description**.
1. Select **Add**.

:::info 
To use your own pipeline data for interactive visualization, add the cloud bucket that contains the results of your nf-core/proteinfold pipeline run. See [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for more information. 
:::

#### Create a Jupyter notebook studio

> From the **Data Studios** tab, select **Add a data studio** and complete the following:

Author: I agree in principle, but what would such a sanity check be? Even in the event of a deleted CE in AWS Batch, which I myself experienced many times while writing this guide, the CE still shows as available in the CEs list. So you either have to launch NF-hello with it or try to start your Studio.

- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
    - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations. The default values are 2 CPUs and 8192 MB memory (RAM).
        :::note

>         Studios compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your shared compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and studio sessions. 

Reviewer: Not sure I understand this concern. Unless they are using tiny instances or an absurdly small max vCPU for the cluster, a new machine should be spun up in the event that an existing instance cant support. 

I appreciate the call out but read this as more alarmist than it needs to be. Might make sense to nuance the message a bit.

        :::
    - Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the S3 bucket or directory path that contains the nf-core AWS megatests proteinfold data, or the pipeline work directory of your nf-core/proteinfold run. 
- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **Jupyter** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the data studio. 
    - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following Conda environment YAML snippet:
    ```yaml 
    channels:
    - schrodinger
    - conda-forge
    - bioconda

>     dependencies:

Reviewer: I'm a fan of hard pinning dependencies, but have been burned by current-at-time-of-publication materials becoming out of data over time. Is it worth having a callout saying "~this stuff works as of DATE, but may change over time. See <some_external_link_listing_EOL/support_timelines> for exact details."

    - python=3.10

>     - schrodinger::pymol-bundle

Author: @FloWuenne The latest version of the script and studio worked correctly without these package changes — and I've recorded a video for the blog with the working visualization and the original packages used to create the Studio. Do we have to update this now, noting that it worked fine before and also would require a re-recorded video?

    - conda-forge::libgl
    - pip
    - pip:
      - biopython==1.85

>       - mdtraj==1.10.3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>       - mdtraj==1.10.3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - py3dmol==2.4.2
```

    ```
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio immediately.
- If you chose to **Add** the studio in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open the studio in a new browser tab. 

#### Visualize protein structures 

> The following Python script visualizes and compares protein structures produced by Alphafold 2 and ESMFold, creating a composite interactive 3D image of the two structures with contrasting colors. The script retrieves the CA atoms from both structures, checks whether the structures have the same number of CA atoms, creates a contact map, calculates the per-residue RMSD for each structure, and visualizes the structures, secondary structures, and per-residue RMSD using PyMOL. 

Reviewer: Is the idea that each subsequent step adds more content to the bottom of the python file? If yes, I'd probably dump all the code into a single python block and then just have inline comments calling out the various sections. I find that - even following my own notes - that multiple cut-and-paste actions generally result in me missing at least one step.

Run the following script in your Jupyter notebook to install the necessary packages and perform visualization:

<details>
<summary>Python script</summary>

>     1. Import libraries:

Reviewer: Bulleting numbers are all `1.` 
I'm reading a raw file so I'm not sure if rendering engine will properly iterate step numbers or not. Calling out just in case.

            
            # Load and display aligned second structure (ESMFold)
            with open(aligned_pdb2_path, 'r') as f:
                pdb2_data = f.read()
            view3.addModel(pdb2_data, "pdb")
            view3.setStyle({'model': 1}, {'cartoon': {'color': 'darkgrey'}})
            
            # Set up the combined view
            view3.zoomTo()
            
            # Add labels for combined view
            view3.addLabel("AlphaFold2", {'position': {'x': -20, 'y': 0, 'z': 0}, 'backgroundColor': 'blue', 'fontColor': 'white'})
            view3.addLabel("ESMFold", {'position': {'x': 20, 'y': 0, 'z': 0}, 'backgroundColor': 'darkgrey', 'fontColor': 'white'})
            
            return view1, view2, view3        
        ```

    1. Display interactive 3D structure views: 

        ```python 
        # Visualize the structures
        view1, view2, view3 = visualize_structures(alphafold2_multimer_standard, esmfold_multimer)

        # Display all views
        print("AlphaFold2 Structure:")
        view1.show()
        print("\nESMFold Structure:")
        view2.show()
        print("\nAligned Structures:")

>         view3.show()        

Reviewer: There's no `if __name__ == "__main__":` control block at the bottom. Omitted on purpose or by accident?

Author: @FloWuenne can you weigh in? FWIW, the script here worked in both Florian's and my Studios.

Author: @gwright99 I suspect it's left out here because we expect users to only run this script directly in their .ipynb, so for our purposes, it's not strictly necessary.

        ```

</details>    

### RStudio: Analyze RNASeq data and differential expression statistics 

Studios and RStudio notebooks enable interactive analysis using R libraries and tools. For example, Shiny for R enables you to render functions in a reactive application and build a custom user interface to explore your data. The public data used in this section consists of RNA sequencing data that was processed by the **nf-core/rnaseq** pipeline to quantify gene expression, followed by **nf-core/differentialabundance** to derive differential expression statistics. This section demonstrates how to create a studio to perform further analysis with these results from cloud storage. One of these outputs is an RShiny application that can be deployed for interactive analysis.

#### Create an AWS Batch compute environment 

> Studios requires an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment with at least 2 CPUs available, create one with the following attributes:

Reviewer: Same comment about starting sentence with "Studios and". I suspect we'll see this in all sections so I'll stop commenting beyond this second entry.

- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
      :::note
      Data studios compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and data studio sessions. The default CPU and memory allocation for a data studio is 2 CPUs and 8192 MB RAM. 
      :::
    - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations. The default values are 2 CPUs and 8192 MB memory (RAM).
    - Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket, or the directory path that contains the results of your nf-core/differentialabundance pipeline run. 
- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **RStudio** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the data studio. 
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio immediately.
- If you chose to **Add** the studio in the preceding step, select **Start** in the options menu, then **Connect** to open the studio in a new browser tab when it is running. 

![Add data studio](./_images/create-ds.gif)

#### Perform the analysis and explore results

> 1. Configure the RStudio environment with installed packages, including [ShinyNGS](https://github.com/pinin4fjords/shinyngs):

Reviewer: I have no familiarity with R. Leaving this section to Florian's expert eye for review.

Studios requires an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment with at least 2 CPUs available, create one with the following attributes:

- **Region**: To reduce costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the 1000 Genomes public data optimally, select **us-east-1**.
- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 2 available CPUs.

#### Add data using Data Explorer

Add the 1000 Genomes S3 bucket to your workspace using Data Explorer:

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**. 
1. Specify the bucket details:
    - **Provider**: AWS
    - **Bucket path**: `s3://1000genomes`
    - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `1000G`.
    - **Credentials**: Select **Public** from the dropdown menu.
    - An optional bucket **Description**.
1. Select **Add**.

:::info 
To use your own data for interactive analysis, see [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for instructions to add your own public or private cloud bucket. 
:::

> #### Create an Xpra studio 

Reviewer: Isn't the whole "killer feature" about XPRA the ability for multiple people to collaborate in the container within the same session? If I'm right, this seems like something you'd want to call out beyond the solo interaction steps currently documented.

Reviewer 3: The killer feature of Xpra is also that it's a whole remote desktop with a GUI.

Author: Added a "Copy studio URL" section to each Studio type to highlight session collaboration.

From the **Data Studios** tab, select **Add a data studio** and complete the following:
- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
      :::note
      Studios compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and data studio sessions. The default CPU and memory allocation for a studio is 2 CPUs and 8192 MB RAM. 
      :::
    - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations.  
    - Mount the 1000 Genomes S3 bucket you added previously using Data Explorer. 
- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **Xpra** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the studio. 
    - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following into the YML field:
        ```yaml 
        channels:
          - conda-forge

>           - bioconda

Reviewer: Any specific reason why `conda` is being used over `pip` here? Worth calling out why?

        dependencies:
          - igv
          - samtools
        ```
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio immediately.
- If you chose to **Add** the studio in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open the studio in a new browser tab. 

#### View variants in IGV desktop

1. In the Xpra terminal, run `igv` to open IGV desktop.
1. In IGV, change the genome version to hg19.
1. Select **File**, then **Load from file**, then navigate to `/workspace/data/xpra-1000Genomes/phase3/data/HG00096/high_coverage_alignment` and select the `.bai` file, as shown below:
    ![Load BAM file in IGV desktop](./_images/xpra-data-studios-IGV-load-bam.png)
1. Search for PCSK9 and zoom into one of the exons of the gene. A coverage graph and reads should be shown, as below:
    ![BAM file view](./_images/xpra-data-studios-IGV-view-bam.png)

> ### VS Code: Create an interactive Nextflow developer environment

Reviewer: Does there need to be any text here that specifically talks about the Nextflow VS Code plugin? 

i.e. "it'll work, you should use it" vs "omg, don't even think about trying that right now"

> ### VS Code: Create an interactive Nextflow developer environment

Reviewer: IIRC VS Code has about a bazillion ways to import user preferences / configurations. Does the tutorial need to consider this angle (e.g. if I have a very customized local VS Code for executing my workflows and I now want to port this to a DS session, I assume I'd want my customizations to come with me?

---
title: "Studios for interactive analysis"
description: "An tutorial for creating interactive analysis Studios for Jupyter, RStudio, VSCode, and more"
date: "17 Feb 2025"
tags: [platform, studios, data studios, jupyter, rstudio, xpra, vscode, conda]
toc_max_heading_level: 3
---

> [Seqera Studios](../data_studios/index.mdx) allows users to host a variety of container images in Seqera Platform compute environments for dynamic analysis using popular tools such as Jupyter and RStudio notebooks, Visual Studio Code IDEs, and Xpra remote desktops. Each studio session provides an individual interactive environment that encapsulates the live environment for real-time data analysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Studios](../data_studios/index.mdx) allows users to host a variety of container images directly in Seqera Platform compute environments for analysis using popular environments including Jupyter (Python) and RStudio notebooks (R), Visual Studio Code IDEs, and Xpra remote desktops. Each studio session provides a dedicated interactive environment that encapsulates the live environment.
```

This guide explores how Studios integrates with your existing workflows, bridging the gap between pipeline execution and interactive analysis. It details how to set up and use each type of studio, demonstrating a practical use case for each.

:::info[**Prerequisites**]
You will need the following to get started:

- Valid credentials for your cloud storage account and compute environment
- To create and configure Studios, you need at least the "Maintain" workspace [user role](../orgs-and-teams/roles.mdx)
- An AWS Batch workspace compute environment (**without Fargate**) with sufficient resources (minimum: 2 CPUs, 8192 MB memory)
- [Data Explorer](../data/data-explorer.mdx) enabled in your workspace
:::

> ### Jupyter: Python-based visualization of protein structure prediction data 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be a H2 to match the other getting-started guides?

Studios and Jupyter notebooks enable interactive analysis using Python libraries and tools. For example, PyMOL is a powerful tool used for visualizing and comparing structures produced by workflows such as [nf-core/proteinfold](https://nf-co.re/proteinfold/1.1.1), a bioinformatics best-practice analysis pipeline for protein 3D structure prediction. This section demonstrates how to create an AWS Batch compute environment, add the nf-core AWS megatests public proteinfold data to your workspace, create a Jupyter studio, and run the provided Python script to produce interactive composite 3D images of the H1065 sequence. 

:::note
This script and instructions can also be used to visualize the structures from the results of nf-core/proteinfold runs with your own public or private data. 
:::

> #### Create an AWS Batch compute environment 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this be a H3 to match the other getting-started guides?

Studios requires an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment available, create one with the following attributes:

> - **Region**: To reduce costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the nf-core AWS megatests public data optimally, select **eu-west-1**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the nf-core AWS megatests public data optimally, select **eu-west-1**.
```

- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 2 available CPUs and 8192 MB of RAM. 

> #### Add data using Data Explorer

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

For the purposes of this guide, add the proteinfold results (H1065 sequence) from the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket to your workspace using Data Explorer:

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**. 
1. Specify the bucket details:
    - **Provider**: AWS
    - **Bucket path**: `s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/proteinfold/results-9bea0dc4ebb26358142afbcab3d7efd962d3a820`
    - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `nf-core-awsmegatests-proteinfold-h1065`.
    - **Credentials**: Select **Public** from the dropdown menu.
    - An optional bucket **Description**.
1. Select **Add**.

:::info 
To use your own pipeline data for interactive visualization, add the cloud bucket that contains the results of your nf-core/proteinfold pipeline run. See [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for more information. 
:::

> #### Create a Jupyter notebook studio

Author: @robnewman my understanding is that what we're creating in this section is a studio. Once we start and connect to that studio, we have a session. I could make that connection step at the end more clear, in that we then create a session. But the purpose of this section is to create the studio and not just a single studio session. 

Once we create the Jupyter studio using the steps in this section, it's added to our list of studios on the **Studios** tab.

> From the **Data Studios** tab, select **Add a data studio** and complete the following:

Reviewer 3: This should be fixed in the next push to Prod

- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 2 available CPUs.

#### Add data using Data Explorer

For the purposes of this guide, add the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket to your workspace using Data Explorer:

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**. 
1. Specify the bucket details:
    - **Provider**: AWS
    - **Bucket path**: `s3://nf-core-awsmegatests`
    - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `nf-core-awsmegatests`.
    - **Credentials**: Select **Public** from the dropdown menu.
    - An optional bucket **Description**.
1. Select **Add**.

:::info 
To use your own pipeline data for interactive analysis, add the cloud bucket that contains the results of your nf-core/differentialabundance pipeline run. See [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for more information. 
:::

#### Create an RStudio notebook studio 

From the **Data Studios** tab, select **Add a data studio** and complete the following:
- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
      :::note

>       Data studios compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and data studio sessions. The default CPU and memory allocation for a data studio is 2 CPUs and 8192 MB RAM. 

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this note be below the "Optional: Enter CPU and memory...." as in the Python example? Also, you don't need to repeat "The default CPU and memory allocation for a data studio is 2 CPUs and 8192 MB RAM."

>       Data studios compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and data studio sessions. The default CPU and memory allocation for a data studio is 2 CPUs and 8192 MB RAM. 

Author: No, it should actually be under the compute env selection as we're advising that users need to select a compute env with sufficient resources available. Fixed this in the Python example, thanks for flagging. Agreed that we need not repeat the default allocation for studios here

      :::
    - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations. The default values are 2 CPUs and 8192 MB memory (RAM).
    - Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket, or the directory path that contains the results of your nf-core/differentialabundance pipeline run. 
- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **RStudio** container image template from the list.

>     - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the data studio. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the studio session. 
```

> - Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio immediately.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio session immediately.
```

> - If you chose to **Add** the studio in the preceding step, select **Start** in the options menu, then **Connect** to open the studio in a new browser tab when it is running. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you chose to **Add** the studio session in the preceding step, select **Start** in the options menu, then **Connect** to open the session in a new browser tab when it is running. 
```

Reviewer: I noticed this in the first example but really noticed it here. The two bullets for how to start a DS session feels clunky to me. I'm not sure what to advise re: fixing it (sorry), but I don't love how it's currently done.

> ![Add data studio](./_images/create-ds.gif)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Add studio session](./_images/create-ds.gif)
```

> #### Perform the analysis and explore results

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

    devtools::install_github('pinin4fjords/shinyngs', upgrade_dependencies = FALSE)
    ```

1. Download the RDS file from nf-core AWS megatests or your own nf-core/differentialabundance results (see [Shiny app](https://nf-co.re/differentialabundance/1.5.0/docs/output/#shiny-app) from the nf-core documentation for file details): 

    ```r 
    # For nf-core AWS megatests
    download.file("https://nf-core-awsmegatests.s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/differentialabundance/results-3dd360fed0dca1780db1bdf5dce85e5258fa2253/shinyngs_app/study/data.rds", 'data.rds')

    # For your nf-core/differentialabundance results, replace the URL with your RDS file URL)
    download.file("https://bucket.s3-region.amazonaws.com/differentialabundance/results/shinyngs_app/study-name/data.rds", 'data.rds')
    ```

1. Import libraries, read your RDS data, and launch the RShiny app:

    ```r 
    library(shinyngs)
    library(markdown)
    esel <- readRDS("data.rds")
    app <- prepareApp("rnaseq", esel)
    shiny::shinyApp(app$ui, app$server)
    ```

![Explore the RShiny app](./quickstart-demo/assets/rnaseq-diffab-rshiny-app-explore.gif)

> ### Xpra: Visualize genetic variants with IGV

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

> Studios and Xpra remote desktop technology enables many interactive analysis and troubleshooting workflows. One such workflow is to perform genetic variant visualization using IGV desktop, a powerful open-source tool for the visual exploration of genomic data. This section demonstrates how to add public data from the 1000 Genomes project to your workspace, set up an Xpra environment with IGV desktop pre-installed, and explore a variant of interest. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Studios and Xpra provides remote desktop functionality that enables many interactive analysis and troubleshooting workflows. One such workflow is to perform genetic variant visualization using IGV desktop, a powerful open-source tool for the visual exploration of genomic data. This section demonstrates how to add public data from the [1000 Genomes project](https://www.coriell.org/1/NHGRI/Collections/1000-Genomes-Project-Collection/1000-Genomes-Project) to your workspace, set up an Xpra environment with IGV desktop pre-installed, and explore a variant of interest. 
```

> #### Create an AWS Batch compute environment 

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

Studios requires an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment with at least 2 CPUs available, create one with the following attributes:

> - **Region**: To reduce costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the 1000 Genomes public data optimally, select **us-east-1**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the 1000 Genomes public data optimally, select **us-east-1**.
```

- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 

> - At least 2 available CPUs .

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- At least 2 available CPUs and 8192 MB of RAM.
```

> #### Add data using Data Explorer

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

Add the 1000 Genomes S3 bucket to your workspace using Data Explorer:

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**. 
1. Specify the bucket details:
    - **Provider**: AWS
    - **Bucket path**: `s3://1000genomes`
    - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `1000G`.
    - **Credentials**: Select **Public** from the dropdown menu.
    - An optional bucket **Description**.
1. Select **Add**.

:::info 
To use your own data for interactive analysis, see [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for instructions to add your own public or private cloud bucket. 
:::

> #### Create an Xpra studio 

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

> From the **Data Studios** tab, select **Add a data studio** and complete the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the **Studios** tab, select **Add a studio** and complete the following:
```

- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
      :::note
      Studios compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and data studio sessions. The default CPU and memory allocation for a studio is 2 CPUs and 8192 MB RAM. 

>       :::

Reviewer 3: Should be below the CPU and memory and don't have the default values in the note (as above)

>     - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations. The default values are 2 CPUs and 8192 MB memory (RAM).
```

    - Mount the 1000 Genomes S3 bucket you added previously using Data Explorer. 
- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **Xpra** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the studio. 

>     - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following into the YML field:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following into the YAML textfield:
```

        ```yaml 
        channels:
          - conda-forge
          - bioconda
        dependencies:
          - igv
          - samtools
        ```

> - Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio immediately.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio session immediately.
```

> - If you chose to **Add** the studio in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open the studio in a new browser tab. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you chose to **Add** the studio session in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open the session in a new browser tab. 
```

> #### View variants in IGV desktop

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

1. In the Xpra terminal, run `igv` to open IGV desktop.
1. In IGV, change the genome version to hg19.
1. Select **File**, then **Load from file**, then navigate to `/workspace/data/xpra-1000Genomes/phase3/data/HG00096/high_coverage_alignment` and select the `.bai` file, as shown below:

    ![Load BAM file in IGV desktop](./_images/xpra-data-studios-IGV-load-bam.png)

1. Search for PCSK9 and zoom into one of the exons of the gene. A coverage graph and reads should be shown, as below:

    ![BAM file view](./_images/xpra-data-studios-IGV-view-bam.png)

> ### VS Code: Create an interactive Nextflow developer environment

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

> Using Studios with VS Code allows you to set up a portable and interactive Nextflow developer environment that contains all the tools you need to code and run Nextflow pipelines. This section will demonstrate how to set up a VS Code Studio with Conda, nf-core tools, and Apptainer, add public data and run the nf-core/fetchngs pipeline with the `test` profile, and create a VS Code project to start coding your own Nextflow pipelines.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using Studios and Visual Studio Code allows you to create a portable and interactive Nextflow development environment with all the tools you need to develop and run Nextflow pipelines. This section demonstrates how to set up a VS Code Studio with Conda, nf-core tools, and Apptainer, add public data and run the nf-core/fetchngs pipeline with the `test` profile, and create a VS Code project to start coding your own Nextflow pipelines.  
```

Reviewer 2: I would completely remove apptainer from this version, as currently it doesn't work inside VSCode studios due to the way we are launching and running studios. Let's focus on conda as the environment engine to use when developing inside VSCode studios for now!

> #### Create an AWS Batch compute environment 

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

Studios requires an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment with at least 4 CPUs available, create one with the following attributes:

> - **Region**: To reduce costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To use the iGenomes public data bucket that contains the nf-core/fetchngs `test` profile data, select **eu-west-1**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To use the iGenomes public data bucket that contains the nf-core/fetchngs `test` profile data, select **eu-west-1**.
```

- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 4 available CPUs.

> #### Add data using Data Explorer 

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

The nf-core/fetchngs pipeline uses data from the NGI iGenomes public dataset for its `test` profile. To add this data to your workspace:

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**.
1. Specify the bucket details:
      - **Provider**: AWS
      - **Bucket path**: `s3://ngi-igenomes/test-data/`
      - A unique **Name** for the bucket: "ngi-igenomes-test-data", or similar
      - **Credentials**: **Public**.
      - An optional bucket **Description**.
1. Select **Add**.

> #### Create a VS Code studio 

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

> From the **Data Studios** tab, select **Add a data studio** and complete the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the **Studios** tab, select **Add a studio** and complete the following:
```

- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
      :::note
      Studios compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Shared compute environments must have sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and studio sessions.
      :::    

>     - Allocate at least 4 CPUs and 8192 MB RAM. 

Reviewer 3: This should be above the note as in other sections for consistency.

    - Mount data using Data Explorer: For the purposes of this guide, mount the NGI iGenomes S3 bucket you added previously. 
- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **VS Code** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the studio. 

>     - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following into the YML field:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following into the YAML textfield:
```

        ```yaml
        channels:
          - conda-forge
          - bioconda
          - anaconda
        dependencies:
          - nf-core
          - conda
        ```

> - Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio immediately.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** the studio session immediately.
```

> - If you chose to **Add** the studio in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open the studio in a new browser tab. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If you chose to **Add** the studio session in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open the session in a new browser tab. 
```

> - Once inside the studio, run `code.` to be able to use the clipboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Once inside the studio, run `code.` to use the clipboard.
```

> #### Run nf-core/fetchngs with Conda 

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

Run the following Nextflow command to run nf-core/fetchngs with Conda:

```shell
nextflow run nf-core/fetchngs -profile test,conda --outdir ./nf-core-fetchngs-conda-out -resume
```

> #### Write a Nextflow pipeline with nf-core tools 

Reviewer 3: Same question about heading level

- **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the nf-core AWS megatests public data optimally, select **eu-west-1**.
- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 2 available CPUs and 8192 MB of RAM. 

#### Add data using Data Explorer

For the purposes of this guide, add the proteinfold results (H1065 sequence) from the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket to your workspace using Data Explorer:

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**. 
1. Specify the bucket details:
    - **Provider**: AWS
    - **Bucket path**: `s3://nf-core-awsmegatests/proteinfold/results-9bea0dc4ebb26358142afbcab3d7efd962d3a820`
    - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `nf-core-awsmegatests-proteinfold-h1065`
    - **Credentials**: **Public**
    - An optional bucket **Description**
1. Select **Add**.

:::info 

> To use your own pipeline data for interactive visualization, add the cloud bucket that contains the results of your nf-core/proteinfold pipeline run. See [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for more information. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use your own pipeline data for interactive visualization, add the cloud bucket that contains the results of your *nf-core/proteinfold* pipeline run. See [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for more information. 
```

:::

### Create a Jupyter Studio

From the **Studios** tab, select **Add a Studio** and complete the following:
- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
        :::note
        Studio sessions compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your shared compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and Studio sessions. 
        :::
    - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations. The default values are 2 CPUs and 8192 MB memory (RAM).

>     - Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the S3 bucket or directory path that contains the nf-core AWS megatests proteinfold data, or the pipeline work directory of your nf-core/proteinfold run. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the S3 bucket or directory path that contains the nf-core AWS megatests proteinfold data, or the pipeline work directory of your *nf-core/proteinfold* run. 
```

- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **Jupyter** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the Studio. 
    - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following into the YAML textfield:
    ```yaml 
    channels:
    - schrodinger
    - conda-forge
    - bioconda
    dependencies:
    - python=3.10
    - conda-forge::libgl
    - pip
    - pip:
      - biopython==1.85
      - mdtraj==1.10.3
      - py3dmol==2.4.2
    ```
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** a Studio session immediately.
- If you chose to **Add** the Studio in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open a Studio session in a new browser tab. 

### Visualize protein structures 

> The following Python script visualizes and compares protein structures produced by Alphafold 2 and ESMFold, creating a composite interactive 3D image of the two structures with contrasting colors. The script aligns mobile structures to reference structures, retrieves lists of C-alpha atoms from both structures, creates views for individual and combined structures, and creates an interactive view of the individual and combined structures using PY3DMol. 

Author: ```suggestion
The following Python script visualizes and compares protein structures produced by Alphafold 2 and ESMFold, creating a composite interactive 3D image of the two structures with contrasting colors. The script aligns mobile structures to reference structures, retrieves lists of C-alpha atoms from both structures, creates views for individual and combined structures, and creates an interactive view of the individual and combined structures using Py3DMol. 
```

            view3.addLabel("ESMFold", {'position': {'x': 20, 'y': 0, 'z': 0}, 'backgroundColor': 'darkgrey', 'fontColor': 'white'})
            
            return view1, view2, view3        
        ```

    1. Display interactive 3D structure views: 

        ```python 
        # Visualize the structures
        view1, view2, view3 = visualize_structures(alphafold2_multimer_standard, esmfold_multimer)

        # Display all views
        print("AlphaFold2 Structure:")
        view1.show()
        print("\nESMFold Structure:")
        view2.show()
        print("\nAligned Structures:")
        view3.show()        
        ```

</details>    

![Visualize predicted protein structures in a Jupyter notebook Studio](./_images/protein-vis-short-gif-1080p-cropped.gif)

#### Interactive collaboration 

To share a link to the running Studio session with collaborators inside your workspace, select the options menu for your Jupyter Studio session, then select **Copy Studio URL**. Using this link, other authenticated users can access the session directly to collaborate in real time.

## RStudio: Analyze RNASeq data and differential expression statistics 

> RStudio notebooks enable interactive analysis using R libraries and tools. For example, Shiny for R enables you to render functions in a reactive application and build a custom user interface to explore your data. The public data used in this section consists of RNA sequencing data that was processed by the **nf-core/rnaseq** pipeline to quantify gene expression, followed by **nf-core/differentialabundance** to derive differential expression statistics. This section demonstrates how to create a Studio to perform further analysis with these results from cloud storage. One of these outputs is an RShiny application that can be deployed for interactive analysis.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
RStudio notebooks enable interactive analysis using R libraries and tools. For example, Shiny for R enables you to render functions in a reactive application and build a custom user interface to explore your data. The public data used in this section consists of RNA sequencing data that was processed by the *nf-core/rnaseq* pipeline to quantify gene expression, followed by *nf-core/differentialabundance* to derive differential expression statistics. This section demonstrates how to create a Studio to perform further analysis with these results from cloud storage. One of these outputs is an RShiny application that can be deployed for interactive analysis.
```

#### Create an AWS Batch compute environment 

Studios require an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment available, [create one](../compute-envs/aws-batch.mdx#batch-forge-compute-environment) with the following attributes:

- **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To browse the nf-core AWS megatests public data optimally, select **eu-west-1**.
- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 2 available CPUs and 8192 MB of RAM.

#### Add data using Data Explorer

For the purposes of this guide, add the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket to your workspace using Data Explorer:

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**. 
1. Specify the bucket details:
    - **Provider**: AWS
    - **Bucket path**: `s3://nf-core-awsmegatests`
    - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `nf-core-awsmegatests`
    - **Credentials**: **Public**
    - An optional bucket **Description**
1. Select **Add**.

:::info 

> To use your own pipeline data for interactive analysis, add the cloud bucket that contains the results of your nf-core/differentialabundance pipeline run. See [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for more information. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use your own pipeline data for interactive analysis, add the cloud bucket that contains the results of your *nf-core/differentialabundance* pipeline run. See [Add a cloud bucket](./quickstart-demo/add-data.mdx#add-a-cloud-bucket) for more information. 
```

:::

### Create an RStudio notebook Studio 

From the **Studios** tab, select **Add a Studio** and complete the following:
- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
      :::note
      Studio sessions compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Ensure your compute environment has sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and Studio sessions.
      :::    
    - Optional: Enter CPU and memory allocations. The default values are 2 CPUs and 8192 MB memory (RAM).

>     - Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket, or the directory path that contains the results of your nf-core/differentialabundance pipeline run. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Mount data using Data Explorer: Mount the nf-core AWS megatests S3 bucket, or the directory path that contains the results of your *nf-core/differentialabundance* pipeline run. 
```

- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **RStudio** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the Studio. 
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** a Studio session immediately.
- If you chose to **Add** the Studio in the preceding step, select **Start** in the options menu, then **Connect** to open a Studio session in a new browser tab when it is running. 

### Configure environment and explore data in RShiny app

> The following R script installs and configures the prerequisite packages and libraries to deploy ShinyNGS, an RShiny application created by members of the nf-core community to explore genomic data. The script also downloads the RDS file from nf-core AWS megatests to use as input data for the Shiny app's various plots, heatmaps, and tables. To use your own nf-core/rnaseq and nf-core/differentialabundance results, modify the script as instructed in step 2 below: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following R script installs and configures the prerequisite packages and libraries to deploy ShinyNGS, an RShiny application created by members of the nf-core community to explore genomic data. The script also downloads the RDS file from nf-core AWS megatests to use as input data for the Shiny app's various plots, heatmaps, and tables. To use your own *nf-core/rnaseq* and *nf-core/differentialabundance* results, modify the script as instructed in step 2 below: 
```

## VS Code: Create an interactive Nextflow development environment

Using Studios and Visual Studio Code allows you to create a portable and interactive Nextflow development environment with all the tools you need to develop and run Nextflow pipelines. This section demonstrates how to set up a VS Code Studio with Conda and nf-core tools, add public data and run the nf-core/fetchngs pipeline with the `test` profile, and create a VS Code project to start coding your own Nextflow pipelines. The Studio includes the [Nextflow VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=nextflow.nextflow), which makes use of the Nextflow language server to provide syntax highlighting, code navigation, code completion, and diagnostics for Nextflow scripts and configuration files.  

#### Create an AWS Batch compute environment 

Studios require an AWS Batch compute environment. If you do not have an existing compute environment available, [create one](../compute-envs/aws-batch.mdx#batch-forge-compute-environment) with the following attributes:

> - **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To use the iGenomes public data bucket that contains the nf-core/fetchngs `test` profile data, select **eu-west-1**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Region**: To minimize costs, your compute environment should be in the same region as your data. To use the iGenomes public data bucket that contains the *nf-core/fetchngs* `test` profile data, select **eu-west-1**.
```

- **Provisioning model**: Use **On-demand** EC2 instances. 
- Studios does not support AWS Fargate. Do not enable **Use Fargate for head job**. 
- At least 4 available CPUs and 16384 MB of RAM.

#### Add data using Data Explorer 

> The nf-core/fetchngs pipeline uses data from the NGI iGenomes public dataset for its `test` profile. To add this data to your workspace:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The *nf-core/fetchngs* pipeline uses data from the NGI iGenomes public dataset for its `test` profile. To add this data to your workspace:
```

1. From the **Data Explorer** tab, select **Add cloud bucket**.
1. Specify the bucket details:
      - **Provider**: AWS
      - **Bucket path**: `s3://ngi-igenomes/test-data/`
      - A unique **Name** for the bucket, such as `ngi-igenomes-test-data`
      - **Credentials**: **Public**
      - An optional bucket **Description**
1. Select **Add**.

### Create a VS Code Studio 

From the **Studios** tab, select **Add a Studio** and complete the following:
- In the **Compute & Data** tab:
    - Select your AWS Batch compute environment. 
      :::note
      Studio sessions compete for computing resources when sharing compute environments. Shared compute environments must have sufficient resources to run both your pipelines and Studio sessions.
      :::    
    - Allocate at least 4 CPUs and 16384 MB RAM. 

>     - Mount data using Data Explorer: To run nf-core/fetchngs with the `test` profile, mount the NGI iGenomes S3 bucket you added previously. Mount any other data directories you need to run and code your own Nextflow pipelines. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Mount data using Data Explorer: To run *nf-core/fetchngs* with the `test` profile, mount the NGI iGenomes S3 bucket you added previously. Mount any other data directories you need to run and code your own Nextflow pipelines. 
```

- In the **General config** tab:
    - Select the latest **VS Code** container image template from the list.
    - Optional: Enter a unique name and description for the Studio. 
    - Check **Install Conda packages** and paste the following into the YAML textfield:
        ```yaml
        channels:
          - conda-forge
          - bioconda
          - anaconda
        dependencies:
          - nf-core
          - conda
        ```
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** a Studio session immediately.
- If you chose to **Add** the Studio in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open a Studio session in a new browser tab. 
- Once inside the Studio session, run `code .` to use the clipboard.

:::tip 
See [User and workspace settings](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/settings) if you wish to import existing VS Code configuration and preferences to your Studio session's VS Code environment. 
:::

### Run nf-core/fetchngs with Conda 

> Run the following Nextflow command to run nf-core/fetchngs with Conda:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Run the following Nextflow command to run *nf-core/fetchngs* with Conda:
```

        ```
- Select **Add** or choose to **Add and start** a studio session immediately.
- If you chose to **Add** the studio in the preceding step, select **Connect** in the options menu to open a studio session in a new browser tab. 

> - Once inside the studio, run `code .` to be able to use the clipboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Once connected to the running session, execute `code .` to be able to use the clipboard.
```
